SPECIAL ISSUE: NEXT-GENERATION IS THEORIES

NEXT-GENERATION INFORMATION SYSTEMS
THEORIZING: A CALL TO ACTION1
Andrew Burton-Jones
UQ Business School, University of Queensland,
Brisbane, QLD 4072 AUSTRALIA {abj@business.uq.edu.au}

Brian S. Butler
College of Information Systems (iSchool), University of Maryland, College Park,
College Park, MD 20742 U.S.A. {bsbutler@umd.edu}

Susan V. Scott
London School of Economics and Political Science,
London, WC21 2AE UNITED KINGDOM {s.v.scott@lse.ac.uk}

Sean Xin Xu
School of Economics and Management, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 1000084 CHINA {xuxin@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn}

1

Why Theorize? Why Now?
Theorizing is the intellectual engine of a scholarly community. With this special issue, we hope to inspire the IS
community to reaffirm its commitment to developing
foundational theories and offer bold new theoretical ideas and
approaches to inspire and shape our field’s future.
Such work is especially important now because of two trends.
In practice, the nature of information systems is changing
faster and their impact is greater than ever before. So many
of the grand challenges of our time, from health and wellbeing, to sustainability, education, and social inclusion, now
depend deeply on information systems. We need bold new
theories to help us understand these challenges and guide our
contributions. While our field has always studied how information systems are developed and how individuals, groups,
organizations, and markets interact with new technology
(Sidorova et al. 2008, p. 475), these activities have changed
dramatically and continue to do so. In contrast, theories tend
to change slowly (Kuhn 1996) and as a result, many of our

theories are unlikely to be sufficient to address today’s new
challenges. We call upon the scholarly community to rethink
our theories and create new theories to guide us.
In research, there is a noticeable counter-trend, namely a
move toward doubting theory’s value. While theory has had
a hallowed status in many fields for decades (Mueller and
Urbach 2017; Straub et al. 1994), two doubts are increasingly
raised. Some question if researchers need theory in an age of
big data and machine learning. According to this view, highly
predictive algorithms may be enough; theory may not be
needed (Anderson 2008; Kitchin 2014; Steadman 2013).
Others ask why we want theory so much. From this perspective, too many researchers suffer from a theory fetish (Avison
and Malaurent 2014), fixation (Hirschheim 2019), or
obsession (Dennis 2019), and devalue other contributions
(Ågerfalk 2014). Similar criticisms have been raised in other
fields (Hambrick 2007), with some arguing that an obsession
with theory risks their field’s future (Tourish 2020).
Our response to the trend in practice is that theorizing is now
more critical than ever. This is because what we are seeing

1

This special issue was accepted while Arun Rai was Editor-in-Chief.

DOI: 10.25300/MISQ/2021/15434

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1, pp.301-314/March 2021

301

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

in practice is a significant rise in complexity, and making
sense of complexity is exactly what theory is for (Popper
1980, p. 59; Wilson 1998, p. 56). After all, the complexity of
a domain rises with increases in the number of elements,
interconnections, and dynamics (Wood 1986). Look at any
context in our work or personal life and that’s exactly what
digitalization is doing: we see more sensors, data, and software, more interfaces and interactions, and more change. We
need theories to help us make sense of this complex world and
to act wisely.
Likewise, our response to the trend in research is that better
theorizing is now more critical than ever. Rather than diminishing the value of theory, new forms of data and machine
learning provide opportunities to improve theorizing, for
example, by becoming new theorizing instruments (Einav and
Levin 2014). Likewise, doubts over the value of theory
should motivate us to theorize more effectively (Agarwal and
Dhar 2014; Berente, Seidel, and Safadi 2019; Chang et al.
2014; Johnson et al. 2019). Many critiques of theorizing are
actually just critiques of old-fashioned views of theorizing
that we can move beyond. We need to adopt fresh approaches
to theorizing for the road ahead (Jordan and Mitchell 2015).
Several of our sister disciplines are having similar discussions
about their own theorizing (Haveman et al. 2019; Moorman
et al. 2019; Zeithaml et al. 2020). And our colleagues in the
data and machine learning communities are recognizing the
need for theory to inform the development of algorithms and
guide approaches for evidence-based decision making (Jordan
and Mitchell 2015). The collective reflection in which we are
engaged is an opportunity for all of us, across academic disciplines and between academia and industry, to reconsider old
intellectual boundaries and lenses and bring fresh insights to
our shared challenges.
We hope this special issue will fuel and sustain the intellectual
engine of our scholarly community at this crucial point in
history. The call for papers issued for this special issue
resulted in the submission of far more papers than we could
publish. Rather than being a problem, we saw this as a rare
chance to trigger a broad intellectual movement that we hope
will be reflected in the publication of exciting theoretical
contributions across the field in the coming years. We are
inspired by this movement, and hope you will be too.

ephemeral data, machine learning, mashups, connected x,
digital x, smart x, hyperautomation, quantum computing, and
augmented reality. That is not what we mean.
As a field, Information Systems scholars know more than
most how important it is to find a balance between focusing
on fundamentals and fads in our theorizing. Accordingly,
rather than referring to the latest “hot” topics, we use nextgeneration theorizing to refer to new ways of thinking that
shift significantly from current patterns of theorizing and
where this shift rewards scholars by revealing significant new
lines of inquiry (adapted from Kitcher 1982, p. 48). The
“generation” label, therefore, has a dual meaning: a new
generation of ideas to inspire a new generation of scholars. In
short, we are looking for fresh, bold, path-breaking ideas,
ideas that can reshape prevailing paradigms or even spark new
ones (Kuhn 1996).

Strategies for Next-Gen Theorizing
At this point, a reader might ask, “MIS Quarterly is always
looking for new ways of thinking, so why do we need a
special issue for it?” The reason is that scientific fields are
often risk-averse (Wang et al. 2017). Authors can feel unsure
how bold they can be, and journals may fail to receive or
accept the novel papers they desire. While MIS Quarterly
works hard to avoid those traps, we still face these risks.
Accordingly, our goal in this special issue was to explicitly
call for fresh, bold, path-breaking work, and to create a
review process that would appreciate and celebrate it.
As noted above, next-generation theorizing is not an exercise
in theorizing the latest hot topics. Rather, as Table 1 shows,
we see four ways of engaging in it, defined by two axes:
•

Stance toward IS phenomena: Researchers may be
studying either existing or new phenomena. Both approaches have long traditions in our field, as shown, for
example, by calls in MIS Quarterly editorials for
researchers to reconsider the fundamental nature of IT
artifacts (see Volume 27, Issue 1) as well as to study the
latest IS phenomenon (see Volume 37, Issue 1). Either
way, next-generation theorizing is needed when
researchers realize that changes occurring in the contemporary world render existing theories insufficient.
Changes in intellectual toolkits are needed to keep up
with changes occurring in familiar phenomena and to
understand new phenomena emerging.

•

Stance toward theorizing: Researchers may be oriented
toward using existing theories or inventing new ones.
Both traditions have long histories in IS research (Keen

What Do We Mean by NextGeneration Theorizing?
At first glance, next-generation theorizing might mean
building theories of blockchain, Internet-of-Things, Industry
4.0, geotargeting, social analytics, big data, the dark web,

302

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Table 1. Four Next-Gen Theorizing Strategies

Inventing new IS
theory
Stance
toward
Theorizing

Using existing (often
reference-discipline)
theory

Stance toward IS Phenomena
Studying existing phenomena in a
Studying new phenomena emerging
changing world
in a changing world
Replace
Envision
(Replacing existing theory with new IS
(Developing a new theory that opens
theory to understand a phenomenon
up a new world)
more effectively)
Reformulate
Extend
(Unpacking and altering a theory
(Expanding a theory significantly so
considerably so that it offers new and
that it can explain/reveal a new world)
better insights)

1980). Some researchers use existing theory (often from
reference disciplines) (Dennis 2019) while others
develop new theory (Grover and Lyytinen 2015; Sarker
et al. 2019). Next-generation theorizing occurs when
researchers show that well-accepted theories need to
fundamentally change or that new theories must replace
old theories in order to engage new realities.
To illustrate these notions, it is helpful to consider some
prominent MISQ papers published with each strategy over the
years.
A seminal example of the replace strategy is Dennis et al.’s
(2008) award-winning paper urging researchers studying ITmediated communication to shift from the theory of media
richness to the theory of media synchronicity. A more recent
(also award-winning) example is Lukyanenko et al.’s (2019)
call for designers to shift from class-based data structures to
instance-based data structures when designing systems for
discovery-oriented data collection. In both cases, the papers
tackled existing phenomena in the field (online communication and online data collection) and developed new theory
to replace existing theory.
An influential example of the reformulate strategy is Nan’s
(2011) effort to improve the prevailing paradigm for studying
system use, which relied on natural language formulations,
with a more formal, agent-based formulation that afforded
more rigorous analysis. A more recent example is Berente et
al.’s (2019) use of institutional analysis to reformulate the
resistance-to-change paradigm so that it can serve as a more
suitable theoretical platform for research on enterprise
systems.
Classic examples of the envision strategy include the development of a new design theory for emergent knowledge
processes (Markus et al. 2002) and the formulation of a new
paradigm for theorizing digital innovation in a ubiquitous

computing environment (Yoo 2010). In both cases, new
theory was developed for new and important domains that
were emerging at that time.
Finally, exemplars of the extend strategy include the extension
of accepted theories of identity to study the emerging notion
of “IT identity” (Carter and Grover 2015) and the extension
of existing theories of the firm, and firm innovation, to study
the changing structure of the firm in a platform-based
economy (Parker et al. 2017). Once again, in these cases, the
focus is on developing forward-looking theory to understand
changes we are beginning to see in the world around us.
While none of these papers was explicitly framed as nextgeneration theorizing, each one exemplifies it. No matter
their stance toward theorizing and toward IS phenomena, each
one calls for and provides a significant shift in thinking, and
opens significant new lines of inquiry.

The Role of the Past and the Future
in Next-Gen Theorizing
As each of the four strategies in Table 1 emphasizes, next-gen
theorizing aims to provide novel ways of thinking that are so
sufficiently different they shift existing patterns of theorizing.
A natural question to ask is: How do we generate next-gen
theoretical innovation and what makes it different?
Broadly, we see two views of what novelty means, providing
researchers with different ways to consider next-generation
theorizing.
A linear view on novelty will make sense for researchers who
see theory building in chronological terms, gaining a better
understanding through successive efforts over time (Cook and
Campbell 1979). From this perspective, a next-generation
theory opens up a new line of work that builds on a prior line
but extends it in a new direction.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

303

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

A hermeneutic view on novelty will make sense for
researchers who see theory building as ongoing attempts to
reach a better understanding of a phenomenon by cycling
between understanding the parts and the whole (Bernstein
1983). Repeated cycles of the hermeneutic circle create
multiple interpretations which afford the possibility to reach
original or unusual understandings that relate to the horizons
of prior views (Peat et al. 2019). From this perspective, a
next-generation theory will provide a significant and original
interpretation of a part, a whole, or a fusion of horizons.
We stress this point about novelty for the simple reason that
pushing for next-generation or new thinking does not mean
forgetting the past. In both interpretations above, we cannot
understand the future without appreciating the past. In the
linear view, scholars must understand the past because the
new lines of inquiry are still path-dependent. In the hermeneutic view, scholars must understand the past because current
and past understandings are related through the hermeneutic
circle. Both views also provide us with a way to think of what
is new. New insights can help move the field forward (linear
view) or deeper and outward (hermeneutic view).
It is important for scholars to understand this link between the
old and the new because a key characteristic of the IS field is
our constantly changing phenomena: novel technologies and
uses continue to emerge (Wang 2010). And yet, we also have
long-lived, persistent phenomena, such as the fundamentals of
information, sociotechnical systems, legacy infrastructure, and
the installed base (Boell 2017; Bostrom and Heinen 1977;
Keen 1980; McKinney and Yoos 2010; Sarker et al. 2019;
Star and Ruhleder 1996; Winter et al. 2014). Thus, those
engaging in next-generation theorizing must keep an eye on
the past while also looking to (or even creating) the future.
To see all these aspects of next-generation theorizing in
action, consider the last special issue on theory in this journal.
The current special issue is MIS Quarterly’s second special
issue devoted to theory papers. In March 1999, MIS Quarterly
issued a Call for Submissions for a Special Issue on
Redefining the Organizational Roles of Information Technology in the Information Age, with the papers ultimately
published across two years (2002–2003). While not named as
such, that special issue was an exercise in next-generation
theorizing motivated by changes occurring during the 1990s.
The papers in that special issue (Griffith et al. 2003; Lamb
and Kling 2003; Markus et al. 2002; Sambamurthy et al.
2003) all became classics.
All four of those papers focused on contemporary phenomena
(knowledge management, digital strategy, and virtual teams),
illustrated new ways of thinking (design theorizing and options thinking), and broadened and challenged core concepts

304

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

(attributing agency to IT not just to users, and critiquing the
notion of “users” altogether). Inspired by the changing contexts of that time, these authors helped reshaped the field’s
thinking and ushered in multiple new lines of inquiry
(achieving an average of 1700 citations each on Google
Scholar).
Despite the continued relevance of these papers, the world has
changed greatly since then. With the passage of time, several
characteristics of these studies are quite noticeable. For example, they focused squarely on organizational contexts and
implications, whereas now the line between organizational
and non-organizational contexts often blurs, and many more
social implications are recognized. They also viewed technological phenomena as relatively isolatable and stable whereas
now there is increasing recognition of the interconnected and
overflowing nature of the digital world. With such significant
shifts taking place, it is unsurprising that other disciplines
have joined us in studying “technology.” This challenges us
to strive toward having impact beyond the IS field, reinforcing
a long-standing commitment to make digital and digitalization
our primary focus, not a background interest, all of which
suggests that we need next-generation theories and approaches
to understand the new world we inhabit and see ahead.

Updating Views on Theory to Enable
Next-Generation Theorizing
Publishing ground breaking theoretical work can be challenging if reviewers’ views on theorizing are locked in the
past. This special issue provides a good opportunity to engage in discussions about the practice of theorizing. After all,
it is hard to engage in next-generation scholarship if our views
on theorizing are out-of-date.
The IS field has a long tradition of reflecting on its theories
and theorizing (Keen 1980). While many of these papers are
well-known, we offer a summary in Table 2 as a reminder.
This literature has been enormously helpful to us and many
others, as has been the broader literature on theorizing in
general (Dubin 1978; Jaccard and Jacoby 2010; Schutz 1962)
and in our neighboring fields (Carroll and Kellogg 1989;
Makadok et al. 2018; Tadajewski 2004; Wacker 1998; Weick
1995).
As we worked on this special issue, we reviewed and reflected
on this literature, as well as on our own experiences as authors
and editors. We identified ways of thinking that work against
taking a next-generation view. In particular, we believe that
some researchers are held back from engaging in nextgeneration theorizing, and some reviewers are held back from

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Table 2. Insights from the IS Literature on Theory and Theorizing
Categories of Insights
Calls for IS-specific vis-à-vis reference
discipline theory
The nature of theory and good theory
Aspects of causal structure

The roles of theory in interpretive,
positivist, and critical research
The nature and opportunities of
grounded theorizing
The role of theory in design and action
research

Example References
Benbasat and Weber 1996; Grover and Lyytinen 2015; Keen 1980; Lee 2001;
Markus and Saunders 2007; Orlikowski and Iacono 2001; Truex et al. 2006;
Weber 1987
Gregor 2006; Hassan et al. 2019; Lee and Baskerville 2003; Rivard 2014; Weber
2003, 2012
Avgerou 2013, 2019; Burton-Jones et al. 2015; Davison and Martinsons 2016;
Hong et al. 2014; Lee et al. 1997; Markus and Robey 1988; Markus and Rowe
2018; Paré et al. 2008; Zhang and Gable 2017
Carroll and Swatman 2000; Klein and Myers 1999; Lee 1991; Longshore Smith
2006; Orlikowski and Baroudi 1991; W alsham 1993
Berente, Seidel, and Safadi 2019; Birk s et al. 2013; Urquhart and Fernandez
2013; Urquhart et al. 2010; W eische et al. 2017
Baskerville et al. 2018; Davison et al. 2012; Gregor and Jones 2007; Gregory and
Muntermann 2014; Rai 2017

appreciating next-generation theorizing, because one or both
parties has an underdeveloped perspective on theorizing.
Accordingly, in Table 3, we detail four shifts in the way theorizing is often understood that we believe are important for
enabling next-generation theorizing:
•
•
•
•

from theory as an intellectual product to theory as an
intellectual conversation
from theory as truth to theory as a lens
from theory as purely desk work to theory as reflective
engagement
from theory as purely representational to performative

Each shift allows reviewers to provide more helpful and
developmental reviews of theoretical work. Viewing theorizing as a conversation enables reviewers to appreciate how
authors are trying to support or change a theoretical tradition.
Viewing theory as a lens helps reviewers appreciate the value
of different perspectives. Viewing theorizing as reflective
engagement allows reviewers to appreciate the benefits of
learning from abstract reflection on one hand and learning in
engaged modes of design and/or action on the other. And by
viewing theorizing as performative, reviewers can see how
authors are being mindful of theoretical positions, the world
with which they are entangled, and how theories can become
generative in ways that are world-making.
In sum, when reviewers keep all four of these perspectives in
mind, we believe they will be more able to identify and shape
the potential of next-generation theories. And when both
authors and reviewers appreciate these perspectives, we believe next-generation theories are more likely to emerge.
Accordingly, we kept these in mind throughout this special
issue process.

The IS Field’s Capabilities and Responsibilities to Engage in Next-Generation
Theorizing
At this point in human history, as digitalization shapes almost
every aspect of work and life, IS phenomena are arguably
some of the most salient phenomena of our time. Unsurprisingly, many fields are now trying to grapple with them.
Yet it remains the case that the IS research community is
uniquely capable of doing so, because we have been theorizing the design, nature, and effects of information technology in business and society for half a century (Emery
1973; Langefors and Samuelson 1975; Mason and Mitroff
1973).
Our theorizing over these decades has benefited from a culture that values theory both for its power of application and
“for its own sake” (Keen 1980, p. 12). Such a culture has
been incredibly important because it has enabled and encouraged scholars to explore the profound complexity of the
phenomena that emerge at the intersection of IT and social
settings (Lee 1999). It is hard not to overstate this complexity. Because information systems are open systems, there
is an inexorable tension between studying the whole system in
all its intricacy (where we risk saying nothing about a lot) and
focusing on a small subset that is more feasible to study
(where we risk saying a lot about nothing). Much of our
field’s history has involved finding a balance between these
poles, and rebalancing over time as the phenomena we study
evolve (Kling and Scacchi 1982; Mumford 2003; Orlikowski
and Scott 2008; Robey et al. 2013; Sarker et al. 2019; Winter
et al. 2014).

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

305

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Table 3. Updating Our Views of Theorizing in the IS Field to Support Next-Generation Theorizing
#

1

Shifts in Views of
Theorizing
From: Theory as
intellectual product

Theory is an explicit set of statements using constructs and
relationships to explain a particular
phenomenon.

To: Theory as
intellectual
conversation

Theory is an evolving set of ideas
that emerge and change over time
within and among scholarly communities. The theory in a specific
paper is a version stabilized among
an authorship and review team at
one time.

From: Theory as
truth

A theory is an attempt to mirror a
portion of reality. The goal is to
select theories with greater fidelity
and to improve the fidelity of
existing theory.

To: Theory as lens

A theory is a lens purposefully
selected for its specific focus and
relevance to key research questions. Need diversity in lenses
because the world is complex and
overflows a single perspective or
priorities. Lenses may offer value
by surfacing questions or sensibilities, not just answers.

From: Theory as
purely desk work

A theory is ultimately a product of
the researcher’s intellect (e.g.,
worked out in her/his armchair or
desk), removed from the empirical
world being studied.

To: Theory as
reflective engagement

A theory can be a product of
reflective engagement and action
research scholarship. While theorizing can require desk work, it can
also occur in and through practice
in the field and during design.

From: Theory as
purely
representational

A theory is a simplified representation of how a portion of the world
works. The aim is to articulate the
core logic in a simple, accurate,
generalizable way.

To: Theory as
performative

A theory that is performative
describes and produces the world
simultaneously. Theories are thus
‘models of’ and ‘models for’ the
world. They can make a difference
to events and the enactment of
reality (both positively and
negatively).

2

3

4

306

Description of Each View

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

Implications of the Shift for
Theorizing in General

Implications of the Shift for
Theorizing in IS

Knowing the history of theoretical
ideas helps researchers when
selecting, building, or assessing
theory. For instance, the choice
of a theory in a study often makes
more sense when you know the
choices in prior studies. Likewise, the way a theory is used in
a study (perhaps in a different
way to the theory’s original intent)
may make sense when viewed in
context.

Need to appreciate the history
of ideas in IS because some
parts of the field change
(sometimes dramatically) while
others stay stable. The goal is
to improve and celebrate old
ideas while building and
refining new ideas. Ideas may
also move in and out of
relevance over time (e.g., the
rise, fall, and rise of interest in
ethics).

Researchers will gain more from
seeking requisite variety in lenses
rather than holding a winnertakes-all view of theory, and by
seeking tractable uncertainty and
productive insight rather than
seeking certainty. New methods
of data-informed theorizing offer
new opportunities for theorizing
by providing and refining lenses.

Need to recognize that many
IS phenomena are emergent,
dynamic, and sociotechnically
complex. Need to scope
theories carefully, appreciate
how theories are enabled and
constrained by our methods,
and recognize that scholarly
communities evolve with
different/changing starting
assumptions.

Researchers seeking to build or
advance theory may need to
engage in the field through
design, action, or interaction even
more than those who wish merely
to apply or test theory or who
conduct atheoretical work. By
corollary, lack of access to the
field or constraints on design/
action can constrain theory
building.

Need to be aware how the
world is changing, how we are
being prevented or constrained
from understanding certain
parts of it, and how we can
engage ourselves in action,
design, and learning with and
from practitioners to theorize
important issues.

Researchers need to be attentive
to their entanglement with the
world and the generativity of the
models with which they work
(whether developed in research
or practice). Researchers can
contribute by articulating,
critiquing, or even improving
these theories, mindful of the
effects of doing so.

Need to appreciate how the
sociomaterial phenomena we
are studying is itself partly a
product of theorizing, and how
our theorizing, in turn, can
potentially be enrolled (by us
and others) into world-making
activities that can make a
difference.

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Not only has the IS field valued theorizing for many years,
our focus on theorizing has increased in intensity over time
(Dennis 2019; Hirschheim and Klein 2012).2 As a result, the
IS field has now generated rich theoretical traditions across its
various domains, from understanding how systems are
developed (e.g., Hirschheim et al. 1995; Orlikowski 1993;
Sabherwal and Robey 1995), to understanding the many ways
individuals, groups, organizations, and markets interact with
IT (e.g., Choudhury et al. 1998; Dennis et al. 2001; Hitt and
Brynjolfsson 1996; Majchrzak et al. 2000; Robey and
Boudreau 1999; Venkatesh et al. 2003; Zuboff 1988). The IS
field also has a rich history of questioning and improving the
philosophical foundations upon which these theories are based
(Hasan et al. 2018; Hirschheim et al. 1995; Mingers and
Willcocks 2004). These improvements in our theories and
theoretical foundations have further benefitted from interplay
with our empirical traditions, such as our longstanding respect
for new data and analysis techniques (Brynjolfsson and Kahin
2000; Maas et al. 2018), diverse research methods (Birks et
al. 2013; Rai 2017; Robey 1996; Sein et al. 2011), and
diverse contexts (Avgerou 2019; Hong et al. 2014;
Ngwenyama and Lee 1997).
Valuing theory comes with costs and challenges. Building
and writing theory can be time consuming and frustrating for
authors. The seemingly never-ending dialogues and debates
that come with building a body of theory can hinder the timely
description and addressing of practical topics. The language
of theory is also often seen by practitioners as esoteric and
academic, exacerbating the research–practice divide. Our
field has a long history of recognizing these challenges
(Hovorka et al. 2019; Keen 1980).
Despite the costs and limitations that a focus on theory can
impose, the theorizing capabilities developed in the IS field
over the past 50 years are critically important, and must be
nurtured, because the trends now facing the world are more
complex and serious than ever. In the field’s early days, some
researchers critiqued what we theorized as “much ado about
nothing” (Huber 1983). But that time has long gone. The
contemporary world is overflowing in digital interactions,
with increasingly serious consequences for individuals,
groups, organizations, markets, and societies (Bharadwaj et al.
2013a; Majchrzak et al. 2016). The world of research is likewise overflowing with digitalization, with ever-more sensors,
data, and techniques (Bailey and Barley 2020).

2

We verified this trend by examining MISQ’s editorial notes throughout the
journal’s history. We found that while editors have balanced their focus on
theory and practice throughout MISQ’s history, editors focused more on
practice in the early years and more on theory in later years, with the 1990s
being the transition.

Because of the growing challenges and complexities wrought
by digital evolution, researchers have a great responsibility to
develop theories that can help society make sense of and act
in the world we encounter and are involved in creating.
Because of our strong capabilities in theorizing, the IS field is
exceptionally well-suited to do so. The responsibility and
opportunity is ours.

The Special Issue Process
and Papers
Motivated by the need to demonstrate and further develop the
IS field’s theoretical capabilities, we released our call for
papers in 2018. We were excited but unsure what we would
receive. We were delighted by the response! In this section,
we outline how we handled the papers we received and we
introduce the papers we accepted.
The special issue process involved four rounds: submission
of abstracts, submission of full papers, and two rounds of
revisions. We conducted reviews at each stage to provide
feedback and cultivate the best work. From around 170
abstracts and 60 full paper submissions, five full papers
emerged. The submitted papers covered the full range of
topics and approaches in the field. We hope all these papers
go on to have substantial influence. The five papers we
accepted, in particular, are outstanding examples of nextgeneration theorizing that we expect to have long-lasting
influence.
In addition to these full papers, we also invited a number of
short contributions on theorizing, under the theme of theoretical “provocations.” As the name suggests, we hope these
thought pieces will provoke readers to think anew about the
work they currently do or might do going forward.
When we reviewed and developed the full papers and provocations, we followed our call-for-papers in searching for
manuscripts that excelled in the following dimensions:
•

Motivate: We sought papers that revealed salient problems with existing theory and provided a powerful case
to support new theorizing. We asked reviewers to question whether the theorization would make a real
difference to our understanding going forward.

•

Create: We sought papers that advanced theory significantly or created entirely new theory. We asked our
reviewers to support authors in advancing beyond familiar or established theories and help them develop ideas
that could be used by others.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

307

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

•

Mobilize: We sought papers that could excite readers to
pursue a new theory’s implications. We asked reviewers
to share our goal of finding inspiring ideas and approaches that enable the IS community to research
differently and better address the challenges around us.

spective of an ecosystem’s parts, Wang replaces this view
with a focus on part-whole dynamics. He achieves this
shift by introducing the concept of holon from ecology to
theorize part–whole relations. He also links it to fundamental IS-specific concepts, such as information
processing, and shows how it can help us understand the
role played by digital technologies in serving to integrate
the parts and whole of an innovation ecosystem. The
new theory offers a fruitful lens for exploring how to
orchestrate a sustainable innovation ecosystem.

For the full papers, we encouraged papers that demonstrated
excellence on all three of these dimensions. For the invited
provocations, we asked authors to focus on motivating and
mobilizing alone, to incite readers to tackle the creation aspect
themselves in the future.
•

Reza Mousavi Baygi, Lucas Introna, and Lotta Hultin, in
their paper “Everything Flows: Studying Continuous
Socio-Technological Transformation in a Fluid and Dynamic Digital World,” provides another example of the
“replace” strategy. Their paper is motivated by the
constant transformative change and flux wrought by new
technologies that we see all around us. While they
acknowledge the growing importance of this issue, their
point is that this has always been the case, for transformative change is all there is. Their paper argues that
while prior theories (which tend to be actor-centric) have
their place, researchers can benefit from shifting to an
alternative, flow-centered orientation to theorizing. The
authors offer concepts from social anthropology to enable
this shift toward flow and show how they can transform
what we look at and theorize. Specifically, they show
how such an orientation toward flow can help us make
sense of rapidly shifting digital phenomena (such as the
online emergence of political movements). The authors
also outline the implications of their flow perspective for
rethinking how we theorize in the field.

•

Aaron Baird and Likoebe Maruping’s paper, “The Next
Generation of Research on IS Use: A Theoretical Framework of Delegation to and from Agentic IS Artifacts,” is
an exemplar of the “reformulate” strategy. Motivated by
the increasing degrees of agency found in contemporary
information systems, the authors call for a change to the
traditional “IS use” paradigm—arguably the largest body
of theory in our field. They argue that this traditional IS
use paradigm needs an accompanying delegation
paradigm if we are to understand the use of agentic IS
artifacts. The reformulation requires a new way of
thinking about use, users, systems, and how their interrelationships lead to outcomes in particular tasks and
contexts. The authors offer a new framework of delegation to help guide research, illustrate several ways it can
be applied, and outline how it can be extended by others
in the future.

•

Gerald Kane, Amber Young, Ann Majchrzak, and Sam
Ransbotham’s, “Avoiding an Oppressive Future of

The Full Papers: Exemplars of NextGeneration Theorizing in
Information Systems
We accepted five full papers, each one introducing a significant shift in thinking in the IS field. Collectively, the papers
reflect all four strategies for engaging in next-generation
theorizing shown earlier in Table 1. Like many strong papers,
they make multiple contributions that can be interpreted in
different ways. While our summaries below cannot do justice
to their entire contribution, they provide a glimpse of what
these papers offer.
•

•

308

Dorothy Leidner and Olgerta Tona, in their paper “The
CARE Theory of Dignity Amid Personal Data Digitalization,” are motivated by the proliferation of personal
data and its implications for human dignity. The authors
outline the limitations of past theories and perspectives
for addressing the totality of the issue and, therefore, the
need for a new overarching theory. The new theory they
create helps reveal the complex relationships between
personal data digitalization and human dignity, including
its positive and negative elements, its individual and collective elements, and its immediate and longitudinal
trends. By serving as an overarching theory, complementing and extending a number of influential theories in
the field, the new theory offers numerous opportunities
for researchers to extend and test it. In terms of Table 1,
this paper is an excellent example of the “extend”
strategy, in that the authors extend theories of dignity to
understand an important emerging phenomenon.
Ping Wang’s paper, “Connecting the Parts with the
Whole: Toward an Information Ecology Theory of Digital Innovation Ecosystems,” is an excellent example of
the “replace” strategy in Table 1. Motivated by the
growing importance of innovation ecosystems and the
difficulty of sustaining them, Wang builds a theory to
understand how efforts can be integrated in such systems.
Whereas prior studies examined this issue from the per-

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Machine Learning: A Design Theory for Emancipatory
Assistants,” illustrates the “envision” strategy. Rather
than explaining the current world, they look into the
future—a future that could be just around the corner
given the signs and trends that we see around us.
Alarmed by the potential oppression that could occur in
this future environment (a world they call “Informania”),
they draw on the traditions of critical theorists and design
theorists to offer a new theory for the design of personal
agents to fight AI oppression. The aim of these agents is
to help avoid a state of Informania and create a future
marked by reconciliation between machines and humans
rather than oppression. This thought-provoking paper
offers new design principles for designers to use and for
researchers to explore. It also exemplifies a form of
theorizing that might be applied fruitfully in many
domains of IS research in the future.

growing scale of digital phenomena, and the limits to our
understanding of scale as revealed by practice theories,
in their provocation, “Scale Matters: Doing PracticeBased Studies of Contemporary Digital Phenomena.”
•

Erik Brynjolfsson, Chong (Alex) Wang, and Xiaoquan
(Michael) Zhang provoke the field to migrate to new
questions, and new ways of answering questions, on the
economics of IT, in their provocation, “The Economics
of IT and Digitization: Eight Questions for Research.”

•

Sudha Ram and Paulo Goes provoke the field to question
the place of theory in the pursuit of high-impact research,
in their provocation, “Focusing on Programmatic High
Impact Information Systems Research, Not Theory, to
Address Grand Challenges.”

•

Bernd Stahl and M. Lynne Markus provoke the field to
reflect on how it can take a leadership position in the
ethics of smart systems, in their provocation, “Let’s
Claim the Authority to Speak Out on the Ethics of Smart
Information Systems.”

We invited eight short provocations, each undergoing several
rounds of editorial review. We selected author teams based
on the abstracts we received from our first call for papers
together with a desire to represent the diversity of voices and
approaches in the field. We sought contributions that could
help the field avoid the perils of risk-aversion that can impede
theorizing (Wang et al. 2017) and the tendency to follow
existing scripts (Grover and Lyytinen 2015). Much like the
“Visions and Voices” contribution in the Digital Business
Strategy special issue (Bharadwaj et al. 2013b), we hoped to
encourage researchers to think differently, spark debate, and
unsettle researchers who have fallen into a rut with existing
scripts.

•

Natalia Levina provokes the field to reflect on the need
to be more transparent and systematic in the way it conceptualizes, uses, and describes theorizing, in her provocation, “All Information Systems Theory Is Grounded
Theory.”

•

Finally, John Leslie King provokes scholars to get back
to their roots in understanding what theorizing is and why
it matters, in his provocation, “Who Needs Theory?”

Each of the provocations provokes researchers in different
ways:

Working on this special issue has been an immense privilege
for us. We saw our roles as helping the IS field, in at least a
small way, to reimagine its theoretical foundations and
futures. It has been an exciting and challenging journey! We
received many more submissions than we could publish, and
we hope all these papers go on to be published in the future.
Together with the excellent papers in this special issue, we
hope this new body of theoretical work creates a new wave of
interest in theory and theorizing, and a new wave of energy
for advancing IS research of all genres.

The Provocations: Ideas and Challenges for
Next-Generation Theorizing in Information
Systems

•

Monica Tremblay, Rajiv Kohli, and Nicole Forsgren provoke the field to rethink what theorizing should be with
practitioner–academic engagement, in their provocation,
“Theories in Flux: Reimagining Theory Building in the
Age of Machine Learning.”

•

Dirk Hovorka and Sandra Peter provoke the field to
revisit its responsibility to help society understand and
shape our shared futures, in their provocation, “Speculatively Engaging Future(s): Four Theses.”

•

Michael Barrett and Wanda Orlikowski provoke the field
to rethink the limits of practice theories in the face of the

Conclusion

As we wrap-up this special issue, we are even more excited
about the potential for theorizing in our field than we were at
its start. The special issue process afforded us a two-year’s
long conversation with scholars from all corners of our field
interested in reflecting on and debating theory. The process

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

309

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

has reinforced our belief that it has never been a more important time in our field to theorize creatively and boldly. It is
through theorizing that we create new ideas and insights.
Theorizing is an expression of our curiosity—our need to
wonder, invent, imagine. And nothing is surer than the need
for this to continue. To paraphrase Duke Ellington’s description of a great musician, it is through theorizing that we keep
the intellectual foundations of our field “perpetually contemporary” (Williams 2007).

acknowledge the generous support of the College of Information Studies at the University of Maryland for hosting our
special issue workshop, and Emily Dacquisto for her help.
We owe a special debt to Dr. Gongtai Wang for his excellent
research and editorial assistance. We also benefitted from
comments from participants in seminars at the London School
of Economics, HEC Montreal, University of Georgia, University of Texas at San Antonio, Deakin University, and Xidian
University. Finally, we acknowledge all the reviewers and
editorial board members serving on the special issue. They
are listed below, alphabetically.

Acknowledgments
We thank Arun Rai for his tireless support for this special
issue and all the authors who trusted us with their work. We

Special Issue Associate Editors and Reviewers
Diane Bailey
Michael Barrett
Michel Benaroch
Beth Bechky
Nicholas Berente
Kevin Boudreau
Glenn Browne
Gordon Burtch
Bendik Bygstad
Hasan Cavusoglu
Min Chen
Panos Constantinides
Robert Crossler
Kevin Crowston
Luciana D'Adderio
John D'Arcy
Alan Dennis
Anne-Laure Fayard
Jens Foerderer
Marlene Fraune
Ahmed Gazawneh
Jodi Gittell
Vern Glaser

310

Varun Grover
Hong Guo
Janine Hacker
Wencui Han
Matthew Hashim
Rudy Hirschheim
Susanna Ho
James Howison
Lucas Introna
Michael Jacobides
Robert Johnston
Steven Johnston
Matthew Jones
Jannis Kallinikos
Prasanna Karhade
Brian Keegan
Seamas Kelly
Huigang Liang
Natalia Levina
Aron Lindberg
Rikard Lindgren
Kalle Lyytinen
Ann Majchrzak

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

Likoebe Maruping
Nigel Melville
John Mingers
Shaila Miranda
Emmanuel Monod
Eric Monteiro
Saggi Nevo
Jeffrey Nickerson
Wanda Orlikowski
Brian Pentland
Alain Pinnsoneault
Neil Pollock
Hatim Rahman
Jan Recker
Ching Ren
Lauren Rhue
Kai Riemer
Lionel Robert
Terence Saldanha
Jorgen Sandberg
Carol Saunders
Krishnan Satish
Steve Sawyer

Ulrike Schultze
Gerhard Schwabe
Anastasia Sergeeva
Teresa Shaft
Maha Shaikh
Pratyush Sharma
Mari-Klara Stein
Ning Su
Anjana Susarla
Barney Tan
Amrit Tiwana
Emma Vaast
Ping Wang
Martin Wiener
Robin Williams
David Xu
Ling Xue
Mochen Yang
Jinjing Zhang
Bob Zmud

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

References
Agarwal, R., and Dhar, V. 2014. “Big Data, Data Science, and
Analytics: The Opportunity and Challenge for IS Research,”
Information Systems Research (25:3), pp. 443-448.
Ågerfalk, P. 2014. “Insufficient Theoretical Contribution: A
Conclusive Rationale for Rejection?,” European Journal of
Information Systems (23:6), pp. 593-599.
Anderson, C. 2008. “The End of Theory,” Wired (16:7), p. 71.
Avgerou, C. 2013. “Social Mechanisms for Causal Explanation in
Social Theory Based IS Research,” Journal of the Association for
Information Systems (14:8), pp. 399-419.
Avgerou, C. 2019. “Contextual Explanation: Alternative Approaches and Persistent Challenges,” MIS Quarterly (43:3), pp.
977-1006.
Avison, D., and Malaurent, J. 2014. “Is Theory King? Questioning
the Theory Fetish in Information Systems,” Journal of Information Technology (29), pp. 327-336.
Bailey, D. E., and Barley, S. R. 2020. “Beyond Design and Use:
How Scholars Should Study Intelligent Technologies,” Information and Organization (30:2), pp. 1-12.
Baird, A., and Maruping, L. M. 2021. “Theorizing IS Delegation:
Supporting the Next Generation of IS Use Research,” MIS
Quarterly (45:1), pp. 315-341.
Barrett, M., and Orlikowski, W. 2021. “Scale Matters: Doing
Practice-Based Studies of Contemporary Digital Phenomena,”
MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp. 467-472.
Baskerville, R. L., Baiyere, A., Gregor, S., Hevner, A. R., and
Rossi, M. 2018. “Design Science Reesarch Contributions:
Finding a Balance between Artifact and Theory,” Journal of the
Association for Information Systems (19:5), pp. 358-376.
Benbasat, I., and Weber, R. 1996. “Rethinking ‘Diversity’ in
Information Systems Research,” Information Systems Research
(7:4), pp. 389-399.
Berente, N., Lyytinen, K., Yoo, Y., and Maurer, C. 2019. “Institutional Logics and Pluralistic Responses to Enterprise Systems
Implementation: A Qualitative Meta-Analysis,” MIS Quarterly
(43:3), pp. 873-902.
Berente, N., Seidel, S., and Safadi, H. 2019.
“Research
Commentary—Data-Driven Computationally-Intensive Theory
Development,” Information Systems Research (30:1), pp. 50-64.
Bernstein, R. J. 1983. Beyond Objectivism and Relativism:
Science, Hermeneutics, and Praxis, Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P. A., and Venkatraman, N.
2013a. “Digital Business Strategy: Toward a Next Generation
of Insights,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 471-482.
Bharadwaj, A., El Sawy, O. A., Pavlou, P., and Venkatraman, N.
2013b. “Visions and Voices on Emerging Challenges in Digital
Business Strategy,” MIS Quarterly (37:2), pp. 633-661.
Birks, D. F., Fernandez, W., Levina, N., and Nasirin, S. 2013.
“Grounded Theory Method in Information Systems Research: Its
Nature, Diversity, and Opportunities,” European Journal of
Information Systems (22:1), pp. 1-8.
Boell, S. K. 2017. “Information: Fundamental Positions and Their
Implications for Information Systems Research, Education, and
Practice,” Information and Organization (27), pp. 1-16.

Bostrom, R. P., and Heinen, J. S. 1977. “MIS Problems and
Failures: A Socio-Technical Perspective. Part 1: The Causes,”
MIS Quarterly (1:3), pp. 17-32.
Brynjolfsson, E., and Kahin, B. (eds.). 2000. Understanding the
Digital Economy: Data, Tools, and Research, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Brynjolfsson, E., Wang, C., and Zhang, X. 2021.“The Economics
of IT and Digitization: Eight Questions for Research,” MIS
Quarterly (45:1), pp. 473-477.
Burton-Jones, A., McLean, E., and Monod, E. 2015. “Theoretical
Perspectives in IS Research: From Variance and Process to
Conceptual Latitude and Conceptual Fit,” European Journal of
Information Systems (24:6), pp. 664-679.
Carroll, J. M., and Kellogg, W. A. 1989. “Artifact as TheoryNexus: Hermeneutics Meets Theory-Based Design,” ACM SIG
CHI Bulletin (20:SI), 1989, pp. 7-14.
Carroll, J. M., and Swatman, P. A. 2000. “Structured-Case: A
Methodological Framework for Building Theory in Information
Systems Research,” European Journal of Information Systems
(9:4), pp. 235-242.
Carter, M., and Grover, V. 2015. “Me, My Self, and I(T):
Conceptualizing Information Technology Identity and its
Implications,” MIS Quarterly (39:4), pp. 931-957.
Chang, R. M., Kauffman, R. J., and Kwon, Y. O. 2014.
“Understanding the Paradigm Shift to Computational Social
Science in the Presence of Big Data,” Decision Support Systems
(63), pp. 67-80.
Choudhury, V., Hartzel, K., and Konsynski, B. 1998. “Uses and
Consequences of Electronic Markets: An Empirical Investigation
in the Aircraft Parts Industry,” MIS Quarterly (22:4), pp.
471-507.
Cook, T. D., and Campbell, D. T. 1979. Quasi-Experimentation:
Design & Analysis Issues for Field Settings, Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Davison, R. M., and Martinsons, M. G. 2016. “Context Is King!
Considering Particularism in Research Design and Reporting,”
Journal of Information Technology (31:3), pp. 241-249.
Davison, R. M., Martinsons, M. G., and Ou, C. X. J. 2012. “The
Roles of Theory in Canonical Action Research,” MIS Quarterly
(36:3), pp. 763-786.
Dennis, A. R. 2019. “An Unhealthy Obsession with Theory,”
Journal of the Association for Information Systems (20:9), pp.
1406-1411.
Dennis, A. R., Fuller, R. M., and Valacich, J. S. 2008. “Media,
Tasks, and Communication Processes: A Theory of Media
Synchronicity,” MIS Quarterly (32:3), pp. 575-600.
Dennis, A. R., Wixom, B. H., and Vandenberg, R. J. 2001. “Understanding Fit and Appropriation Effects in Group Support Systems
via Meta-Analysis,” MIS Quarterly (25:2), pp. 167-193.
Dubin, R. 1978. Theory Building (rev. ed.), New York: The Free
Press.
Einav, L., and Levin, J. 2014. “Economics in the Age of Big Data,”
Science (346:6210), 1243089.
Emery, J. C. 1973. “An Overview of Management Information
Systems,” The DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems
(5), pp. 1-15.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

311

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Goes, P. 2013. “Editor’s Comments,” MIS Quarterly (37:1), pp.
iii-vii.
Gregor, S. 2006. “The Nature of Theory in Information Systems,”
MIS Quarterly (30:3), pp. 611-642.
Gregor, S., and Jones, D. 2007. “The Anatomy of a Design
Theory,” Journal of the Association for Information Systems
(8:5), pp. 312-335.
Gregory, R. W., and Muntermann, J. 2014. “Heuristic Theorizing:
Proactively Generating Design Theories,” Information Systems
Research (25:3), pp. 639-653.
Griffith, T. L., Sawyer, J. E., and Neale, M. A. 2003. “Virtualness
and Knowledge in Teams: Managing the Love Triangle of
Organizations, Individuals, and Information Technology,” MIS
Quarterly (27:2), pp. 265-287.
Grover, V., and Lyytinen, K. 2015. “New State of Play in
Information Systems Research: The Push to the Edges,” MIS
Quarterly (39:2), pp. 271-296.
Hambrick, D. C. 2007. “The Field of Management's Devotion to
Theory: Too Much of a Good Thing?,” Academy of Management
Journal (50:6), pp. 1346-1352.
Hasan, N. R., Mingers, J., and Stahl, B. 2018. “Philosophy and
Information Systems: Where are We and Where Should We
Go?,” European Journal of Information Systems (27:3), pp.
263-277.
Hassan, N. R., Mathiassen, L., and Lowry, P. B. 2019. “The Process of Information Systems Theorizing as a Discursive Practice,”
Journal of Information Technology (34:3), pp. 198-220.
Haveman, H. A., Mahoney, J. T., and Mannix, E. 2019. “Call for
Papers: AMR Special Topic Forum: The Role of Theory in
Management Research,” Academy of Management Review, pp.
1-3.
Hirschheim, R. 2019. “Against Theory: With Apologies to
Feyerabend,” Journal of the Association for Information Systems
(20:9), pp. 1340-1357.
Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H. K. 2012. “A Glorious and
Not-So-Short History of the Information Systems Field,” Journal
of the Association for Information Systems (13:4), pp. 188-235.
Hirschheim, R., Klein, H., and Lyytinen, K. 1995. Information
Systems Development and Data Modeling: Conceptual and
Philosophical Foundations, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Hitt, L. M., and Brynjolfsson, E. 1996. “Productivity, Business
Profitability, and Consumer Surplus: Three Different Measures
of Information Technology Value,” MIS Quarterly (20:2), pp.
121-142.
Hong, W., Chan, K. Y., Thong, J. Y. L., Chasalow, L., and
Dhillon, G. 2014. “The Role of Context in Theory Development: A Framework and Guidelines for Context-Specific
Theorizing in Information Systems Research,” Information
Systems Research (25:1), pp. 111-136.
Hovorka, D., Rowe, F., Markus, M. L., Jarvenpaa, S., Swanson,
E. B., Lacity, M., Burton-Jones, A., Venkatesh, V., and
Hirschheim, R. 2019. “Scholarly Commentaries on Hirschheim’s ‘Against Theory,’” Journal of the Association for Information Systems (20:9), pp. 1358-1389.
Hovorka, D. S., and Peter, S. 2021. “Speculatively Engaging
Future(s): Four Theses,” MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp. 461-466.

312

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

Huber, G. P. 1983. “Cognitive Style as a Basis for MIS and DSS
Design: Much Ado About Nothing?,” Management Science
(29:5), pp. 567-579.
Jaccard, J., and Jacoby, J. 2010. Theory Construction and
Model-Building Skills, New York: Guilford Press.
Johnson, S. L., Gray, P., and Sarker, S. 2918, “Revisiting IS
Research Practice in the Era of Big Data,” Information and
Organization (29), pp. 41-56.
Jordan, M. I., and Mitchell, T. M. 2015. “Machine Learning:
Trends, Perspectives, and Prospects,” Science (349:6245), pp.
255-260.
Kane, G. C., Young, A. G., Majchrzak, A., and Ransbotham, S.
2021. “Avoiding an Oppressive Future of Machine Learning: A
Design Theory for Emancipatory Assistants,” MIS Quarterly
(45:1), pp. 371-396.
Keen, P. G. W. 1980. “MIS Research: Reference Disciplines and
a Cumulative Tradition,” in Proceedings of the First Conference
on Information Systems, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 9-18.
King, J. L. 2021. “Who Needs Theory,” MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp.
495-498.
Kitcher, P. 1982. Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kitchin, R. 2014. “Big Data, New Epistemologies and Paradigm
Shifts,” Big Data and Society (1:1), pp. 1-12.
Klein, H. K., and Myers, M. D. 1999. “A Set of Principles for
Conducting and Evaluating Interpretive Field Studies in
Information Systems,” MIS Quarterly (23:1), pp. 67-93.
Kling, R., and Scacchi, W. 1982. “The Web of Computing:
Computer Technology as Social Organization,” Advances in
Computers (21), pp. 1-90.
Kuhn, T. S. 1996. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (3rd ed.),
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamb, R., and Kling, R. 2003. “Reconceptualizing Users as Social
Actors in Information Systems Research,” MIS Quarterly (27:2),
pp. 197-235.
Langefors, B., and Samuelson, K. 1975. Information and Data in
Systems, New York: Petrocelly/Charter.
Lee, A. S. 1991. “Integrating Positivist and Interpretive Approaches to Organizational Research,” Organization Science
(2:4), pp. 342-365.
Lee, A. S. 1999. “Inaugural Editor’s Comments: The MIS Field,
the Publication Process, and the Future Course of MIS
Quarterly,” MIS Quarterly (23:1), pp. v-xi.
Lee, A. S. 2001. “Editor’s Comments: Research in Information
Systems: What We Haven’t Learned,” MIS Quarterly (25:4), pp.
v-xv.
Lee, A. S., and Baskerville, R. 2003. “Generalizing Generalizability in Information Systems Research,” Information Systems
Research (14:3), pp. 221-243.
Lee, B., Barua, A., and Whinston, A. B. 1997. “Representation of
Causal Relationships in MIS Research: A Methodological
Framework,” MIS Quarterly (21:1), pp. 109-136.
Leidner, D., and Tona, O. 2021. “The CARE Theory of Dignity
Amid Personal Data Digitalization,” MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp.
343-370.
Levina, N. 2021. “All Information Systems Theory Is Grounded
Theory,” MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp. 489-494.

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Longshore Smith, M. 2006. “Overcoming Theory–Practice Inconsistencies: Critical Realism and Information Systems Research,”
Information and Organization (16), 2006, pp. 191-211.
Lukyanenko, R., Parsons, J., Wiersma, Y., and Maddah, M. 2019.
“Expecting the Unexpected: Effects of Data Collection Design
Choices on the Quality of Crowdsourced User-Generated
Content,” MIS Quarterly (43:2), pp. 623-647.
Maas, W., Parsons, J., Purao, S., Storey, V. C., and Woo, C. 2018.
“Data-Driven Meets Theory-Driven Research in the Era of Big
Data: Opportunities and Challenges for Information Systems
Research,” Journal of the Association for Information Systems
(19:12), pp. 1253-1273.
Majchrzak, A., Markus, M. L., and Wareham, J. 2016. “Designing
for Digital Transformation: Lessons for Information Systems
Research from the Study of ICT and Societal Challenges,” MIS
Quarterly (40:2), pp. 267-277.
Majchrzak, A., Rice, R. E., Malhorta, A., King, N., and Ba, S.
2000. “Technology Adaptation: The Case of a ComputerSupported Inter-Organizational Virtual Team,” MIS Quarterly
(24:4), pp. 569-600.
Makadok, R., Burton, R., and Barney, J. 2018. “A Practical Guide
for Making Theory Contributions in Strategic Management,”
Strategic Management Journal (39:6), pp. 1530-1545.
Markus, M. L., Majchrzak, A., and Gasser, L. 2002. “A Design
Theory for Systems that Support Emergent Knowledge
Processes,” MIS Quarterly (26:3), pp. 179-212.
Markus, M. L., and Robey, D. 1988. “Information Technology and
Organizational Change: Causal Structure in Theory and
Research,” Management Science (34:5), pp. 583-598.
Markus, M. L., and Rowe, F. 2018. “Is IT Changing the World?
Conceptions of Causality for Information Systems Theorizing,”
MIS Quarterly (42:4), pp. 1255-1280.
Markus, M. L., and Saunders, C. 2007. “Looking for a Few Good
Concepts…and Theories…for the Information Systems Field,”
MIS Quarterly (31:1), pp. iii-vi.
Mason, R. O., and Mitroff, I. I. 1973. “A Program of Research on
Management Information Systems,” Management Science (19:5),
pp. 475-487.
McKinney, E. H., and Yoos, C. J. 2010. “Information about
Information: A Taxonomy of Views,” MIS Quarterly (34:2), pp.
329-344.
Mingers, J., and Willcocks, L. (eds.). 2004. Social Theory and
Philosophy for Information Systems, Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons.
Moorman, C., van Heerde, H. J., Moreau, C. P., and Palmatier,
R. W. 2019. “Challenging the Boundaries of Marketing,”
Journal of Marketing (83:5), pp. 1-4.
Mousavi Baygi, R., Introna, L., and Hultin, L. 2021. “Everything
Flows: Studying Continuous Socio-Technological Transformation in a Fluid and Dynamic Digital World,” MIS Quarterly
(45:1), pp. 423-452.
Mueller, B., and Urbach, N. 2017. “Understanding the Why, What,
and How of Theories in IS Research,” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems (41:17), pp. 349-388.
Mumford, E. 2003. “Information Systems Research and the Quest
for Certainty,” Journal of the Association for Information
Systems (4:4), pp. 197-205.

Nan, N. 2011. “Capturing Bottom-Up IT Use Processes: A Complex Adaptive Systems Model,” MIS Quarterly 2011, pp.
505-532.
Ngwenyama, O. K., and Lee, A. S. 1997. “Communication
Richness in Electronic Mail: Critical Social Theory and the
Contextuality of Meaning,” MIS Quarterly (21:2), pp. 145-167.
Orlikowski, W. J. 1993. “CASE Tools as Organizational Change:
Investigating Incremental and Radical Changes in Systems
Development,” MIS Quarterly (17:3), pp. 309-340.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Baroudi, J. J. 1991. “Studying Information
Technology in Organizations: Research Approaches and
Assumptions,” Information Systems Research (2:1), pp. 1-28.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Iacono, C. S. 2001. “Desperately Seeking
the ‘IT’ in IT Research—A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact,”
Information Systems Research (12:2), pp. 121-134.
Orlikowski, W. J., and Scott, S. V. 2008. “Sociomateriality:
Challenging the Separation of Technology, Work and Organization,” The Academy of Management Annals (2:1), pp. 433-474.
Paré, G., Bourdeau, S., Marsan, J., Nach, H., and Shuraida, S. 2008.
“Re-examining the Causal Structure of Information Technology
Impact Research,” European Journal of Information Systems
(17:4), pp. 403-416.
Parker, G., Van Alstyne, M., and Jiang, X. 2916, “Platform
Ecosystems: How Developers Invert the Firm,” MIS Quarterly
(41:1), pp. 255-266.
Peat, G., Rodriguez, A., and Smith, J. 2019. “Interpretive
Phenomenological Analysis Applied to Healthcare Research,”
BMJ: Evidence Based Nursing (22:1), pp. 7-9.
Popper, K. 1980. The Logic of Scientific Discovery, London:
Unwin Hyman.
Rai, A. 2017. “Editor’s Comments: Diversity of Design Science
Research,” MIS Quarterly (41:1), pp. iii-xviii.
Ram, S., and Goes, P. 2021. “Focusing on Programmatic High
Impact Information Systems Research, Not Theory, to Address
Grand Challenges,” MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp. 479-483.
Rivard, S. 2014. “The Ions of Theory Construction,” MIS
Quarterly (38:2), pp. iii-xiii.
Robey, D. 1996. “Diversity in Information Systems Research:
Threat, Promise, and Responsibility,” Information Systems
Research (7:4), pp. 400-408.
Robey, D., Anderson, C., and Raymond, B. 2013. “Information
Technology, Materiality, and Organizational Change: A Professional Odyssey,” Journal of the Association for Information
Systems (14:7), pp. 379-398.
Robey, D., and Boudreau, M.-C. 1999. “Accounting for the
Contradictory Organizational Consequences of Information Technology: Theoretical Directions and Methodological Implications,” Information Systems Research (10:2), pp. 167-185.
Sabherwal, R., and Robey, D. 1995. “Reconciling Variance and
Process Strategies for Studying Information Systems Development,” Information Systems Research (6:4), pp. 303-327.
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., and Grover, V. 2003. “Shaping
Agility through Digitial Options: Reconceptualizing the Role of
Information Technology in Contemporary Firms,” MIS Quarterly
(27:2), pp. 237-263.

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

313

Burton-Jones et al./Special Issue: Introduction

Sarker, S., Chatterjee, S., Xiao, X., and Elbanna, A. 2019. “The
Sociotechnical. “Axis of Cohesion” for the IS Discipline: Its
Historical Legacy and its Continued Relevance,” MIS Quarterly
(43:3), pp. 695-719.
Schutz, A. 1962. “Concept and Theory Formation in the Social
Sciences,” in Collected Papers, M. Natanson (ed.), The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1962, pp. 48-66.
Sein, M. K., Henfridsson, O., Purao, S., Rossi, M., and Lindgren, R.
2011. “Action Design Research,” MIS Quarterly (35:1), pp.
35-56.
Sidorova, A., Evangelopoulos, N., Valacich, J. S., and Ramakrishnan, T. 2008. “Uncovering the Intellectual Core of the
Information Systems Discipline,” MIS Quarterly (32:3), pp.
467-482.
Stahl, B. C., and Markus, M. L. 2021. “Let’s Claim the Authority
to Speak Out on the Ethics of Smart Information Systems,” MIS
Quarterly (45:1), pp. 485-488.
Star, S. L., and Ruhleder, K. 19996. “Steps Towards an Ecology of
Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information
Spaces,” Information Systems Research (7:1), pp. 111-134.
Steadman, I. 2013. “Big Data and the Death of the Theorist,”
Wired, January 25 (https://www.wired.co.uk/article/big-dataend-of-theory).
Straub, D. W., Ang, S., and Evaristo, R. 1994. “Normative
Standards for IS Research,” DataBase for Advances in
Information Systems (25:1), pp. 21-34.
Tadajewski, M. 2004. “The Philosophy of Marketing Theory:
Historical and Future Directions,” The Marketing Review (4:3),
pp. 307-340.
Tourish, D. 2020. “The Triumph of Nonsense in Management
Studies,” Academy of Management Learning & Education (19:1),
pp. 99-109.
Tremblay, M. C., Kohli, R., and Forsgren, N. 2021. “Theories in
Flux: Reimagining Theory Building in the Age of Machine
Learning,” MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp. 455-459.
Truex, D., Holmström, J., and Keil, M. 2006. “Theorizing in
Information Systems Research: A Reflexive Analysis of the
Adaptation of Theory in Information Systems Research,” Journal
of the Association for Information Systems (7:12), pp. 797-821.
Urquhart, C., and Fernandez, W. 2013. “Using Grounded Theory
Method in Information Systems: The Researcher as Blank Slate
and Other Myths,” Journal of Information Technology (28), pp.
224-236.
Urquhart, C., Lehmann, H., and Myers, M. D. 2010. “Putting the
‘Theory’ Back into Grounded Theory: Guidelines for Grounded
Theory Studies in Information Systems,” Information Systems
Journal (20), pp. 357-381.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., and Davis, F. D. 2003.
“User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Unified
View,” MIS Quarterly (27:3), pp. 425-478.

314

MIS Quarterly Vol. 45 No. 1/March 2021

Wacker, J. G. 1998. “A Definition of Theory: Research Guidelines
for Different Theory-Building Research Methods in Operations
Management,” Journal of Operations Management (16:4), pp.
361-385.
Walsham, G. 1993. Interpreting Information Systems in Organizations, Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Wang, J., Veugelers, R., and Stephan, P. 2017. “Bias Against
Novelty in Science: A Cautionary Tale for Users of Bibliometric
Indicators,” Research Policy (46), pp. 1416-1436.
Wang, P. 2010. “Chasing the Hottest IT: Effects of Information
Technology Fashion on Organizations,” MIS Quarterly (34:1),
pp. 63-85.
Wang, P. 2021. “Connecting the Parts with the Whole: Toward an
Information Ecology Theory of Digital Innovation Ecosystems,”
MIS Quarterly (45:1), pp. 397-422.
Weber, R. 1987. “Toward a Theory of Artifacts: A Paradigmatic
Basis for Information Systems Research,” Journal of Information
Systems (1:2), pp. 3-19.
Weber, R. 2003. “Editor’s Comments: Theoretically Speaking,”
MIS Quarterly (27:3), pp. iii-xii.
Weber, R. 2012. “Evaluating and Developing Theories in the
Information Systems Discipline,” Journal of the Association for
Information Systems (13:1), pp. 1-30.
Weick, K. E. 1995. “What Theory is Not, Theorizing Is,”
Administrative Science Quarterly (40:3), pp. 385-390.
Weische, M., Jurisch, M., Yetton, P., and Krcmar, H. 2017.
“Grounded Theory Methodology in Information Systems
Research,” MIS Quarterly (41:3), pp. 685-701.
Williams, M. L. 2007. “Perpetually Contemporary,” NPR News,
July 25 (https://www.npr.org/2007/07/25/11904062/ mary-louwilliams-perpetually-contemporary).
Wilson, E. O. 1998. Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge, New
York: Vintage Books.
Winter, S., Berente, N., Howison, J., and Butler, B. 2014. “Beyond
the Organizational ‘Container’: Conceptualizing 21st Century
Sociotechnical Work,” Information and Organization (24:4), pp.
250-269.
Wood, R. E. 1986. “Task Complexity: Definition of the Construct,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes
(37:1), pp. 60-82.
Yoo, Y. 2010. “Computing in Everyday Life: A Call for Research
on Experiential Computing,” MIS Quarterly (34:2), pp. 213-231.
Zeithaml, V. A., Jaworski, B. J., Kohli, A. K., Tuli, K. R.,
Ulaga, W., and Zaltman, G. 2020. “A Theories-in-Use Approach
to Building Marketing Theory,” Journal of Marketing (84:1), pp.
32-51.
Zhang, M., and Gable, G. G. 2017. “A Systematic Framework for
Multilevel Theorizing in Information Systems Research,” Information Systems Research (28:2), pp. 203-224.
Zuboff, S. 1988. In the Age of the Smart Machine: The Future of
Work and Power, New York: Basic Books.

Copyright of MIS Quarterly is the property of MIS Quarterly and its content may not be
copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's
express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for
individual use.

